Add Software Container Architecture (#149)
Pelagicore/software-factory: docs/chapters/architecture/SWC/software-container.rst

:orphan:

.. _software-container:

Software Container
==================

Introduction and goals
----------------------

> The Software Container is a framework that manage and contain applications created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Software Container is a framework that manages and contains applications created
```

and vetted by third party developers in an automotive setting. A launcher 
(a UI for example) sends a signal to the Software Container to start a new 
Container. It can then configure the Container using a documented JSON format and 

> can launch process inside the Container. This can then be used to contain 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can launch process inside the Container. This can then be used to isolate 
```

> can launch process inside the Container. This can then be used to isolate 

Reviewer: "process" should be "a process" or "processes"

applications from each other and make sure they are not interfering with each 
other and to limit/manage resources available to the applications.

Each container is configured using gateways, where each gateway has a scope of 

> influence (network, dbus, files, pulseaudio, for example). The gateways get a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
influence (e.g. network, dbus, files, pulseaudio). The gateways get a 
```

configuration snippet from the Launcher which they will enforce.

Requirements overview
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Basic usage
"""""""""""

> - Software Container Agent component is started at the PELUX boot-up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The SoftwareContainerAgent component is started at the PELUX boot-up
```

Reviewer: Possibly and in that case also change the following uses of Software Container Agent to use this way of writing.

- An application launcher is used to launch applications in containerized form 
  using the d-bus interface provided by the Software Container Agent. In PELUX 
  QtApplicationManager is used to launch Neptune3 applications in container

Basic requirements
""""""""""""""""""

Software Container Agent should provide mechanisms,

- To create container
- To bind-mount filesystem paths
- To enable communication between the contained system and the host system in 
  order to access host system environment, services and resources, for e.g.

+-----------------------+
| File System           |
+-----------------------+
| Devices               |
+-----------------------+
| Environment variables |
+-----------------------+
| D-Bus                 |
+-----------------------+
| Internet Connectivity |
+-----------------------+
| cgroups               |
+-----------------------+

- To destroy container

Quality goals
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The main quality goal for the Software Container is to create sand-box for 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main quality goal for the Software Container is to a create sandbox for 
```

applications/processes in a way that the applications inside the container can 
only access the host system's environment, services and resources through the 
configured capabilities/gateways.

Stakeholders
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Software Developer
- Platform Integrator

System context
--------------

Business context
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Within automotive software, it may be desirable in some cases to utilize a single 

> ECU for several functions. For e.g. it would be beneficial to use the same ECU 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ECU for several functions, e.g. it would be beneficial to use the same ECU 
```

for Telematics and Infotainment functions, rather than having separate under-utilized 
ECUs for each. However, applications within these functions can have different 
resource requirements as well as different levels of importance/priorities, therefore 

> it is important to have mechanisms to separate them in a way that they don't 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is important to have mechanisms to separate them in a way that they do not 
```

> interfere with each other. This can be achieved through the use of Software Container 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interfere with each other. This can be achieved through the use of Software Container.
```

> which achieve this goal through,

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Possibly something missing in the text here if there was meant to be a longer elaboration on the "why". If the reason for the comma was to reference the following two sections, then I don't think you should use a comma, but instead write something like "This can be achieved through the use of Software Container, which achieves this in the following ways."

> **Application Isolation**

Reviewer 2: Instead of simply using bold text, we should use the header. I believe after the `^^^^^^^^^^` is `"""""""""""""`. In this way they will be visible on the toctree.

> The idea is to separate different applications so that they run in their own 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Separate applications so they run in their own 
```

> namespace with their own isolated filesystem as well as processes that are isolated 

Reviewer 2: Previously on the table above, filesystem was mentioned as File System. I believe that is a more correct way to say it.

> namespace with their own isolated filesystem as well as processes that are isolated 

Reviewer: "filesystem": we had this word in another text and had to add the word in the spellchecker since it only recognized "file system". These are two accepted ways to write the same word, but one doesn't require to add it to the spellchecker.

from the processes on the host system or in other containers. The only communication 
between, host and containerized systems should be through restricted access 
mechanisms.

> **Resource limitation**

Reviewer 2: Same as above regarding the header.

> The idea is to allow different applications running in container to have maximum 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allow applications running in containers to have upper 
```

limits on resources such as memory and CPU share. This will allow more important 

> applications to not starve for memory and CPU, in-case a less important application 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applications to not starve for memory and CPU, in case a less important application 
```

> start hogging the memory or CPU resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
starts hogging the memory or CPU resources.
```

Solution strategy
-----------------

In PELUX, the containerization is implemented using,

> - Qt Application Manager as launcher that initiates creation, setup and execution 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Qt Application Manager as a launcher that initiates creation, setup and execution 
```

  of applications inside Software Container
- Software Container Plugin for Qt Application Manager, that implements the 
  communications between Qt Application Manager and the Software Container Agent. 
  This plugin is also responsible for mapping applications and their capabilities 
  defined in Service Manifest

> - Software Container Agent which expose a d-bus API which is used by the Software 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Software Container Agent which exposes a d-bus API which is used by the Software 
```

  Container Plugin to request creation, setup and execution of containerized 

>   applications. The Software Container Agent is built on top of Linux Container 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  applications. The Software Container Agent is built on top of the Linux Container 
```

  solution LXC

Building blocks view
--------------------

Software Container Agent
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Software Container has been designed as a building block enabling sand-boxing of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Software Container has been designed as a building block enabling sandboxing of 
```

application contents in a larger system. The Software Container achieves this by 
providing a structured way to limit what inter-process communication (IPC) mechanisms 
are made available to each application. By targeting the IPC mechanisms rather than 

> the applications or services directly, the sand-boxing mechanism can be deployed in a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the applications or services directly, the sandboxing mechanism can be deployed in a 
```

non-intrusive way, i.e. completely transparent to both applications and services. Each 
IPC is managed by a gateway. The IPC needs of each service is described in service 
manifest files, defining capabilities and mapping these to individual gateway 
configurations. This can be individual objects or interfaces on D-Bus, networking 
filter rules, access to device nodes or something completely different. Each 
application is then associated with a set of capabilities. This could be done through 
an application manifest, or any other method supported by the launcher. These are used 
to configure the sandbox in which the application is then launched.

In a typical deployment the Software Container is coupled with a launcher, which is 
responsible for initiating containers and provide an entry point to start execution 
from. This means that Software Container is not intended to be used as a standalone 
tool, but rather as a toolbox to build the full experience from. The launcher is 
responsible for providing Software Container with a list of capabilities, a mount point 

> for the application payload and an entry-point to start execution from.The Software 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the application payload and an entry point to start execution from. The Software 
```

Container does not concern itself with application packaging, deployment of manifest 
formats. All it does is associate the given capabilities with gateway configurations 

> to setup the sandbox with the appropriate IPC access to the surrounding world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to set up the sandbox with the appropriate IPC access to the surrounding world.
```

popups. This is generally added to the end of the name, e.g. com.pelagicore.popups and 
com.pelagicore.popups.important.

The service manifests are typically placed in one JSON file per service, but can be split into 
one file per capability if needed.

For more detailed information about service manifests content and format see `Service manifests`_

.. _Service manifests: https://pelagicore.github.io/softwarecontainer/user-docs/chapters/service-manifests/index.html#service-manifests

Runtime view
------------

.. image:: graphs/runtimeview.png

Appendix: Getting Containerized Applications up and running in PELUX
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Preparing the Launcher
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An essential part of integrating a complete solution for containerization is to implement some 
kind of an Application Launcher, which is responsible for launching applications in either 
containerized or non-containerized mode. It should also be responsible for setting up sandboxes 
for containerized applications and then launch the application entry point.

In PELUX `QtApplicationManager`_ is used as the launcher to run Neptune3 UI applications in 

> containerized form. Qt Application Manager provides a plugin interface to configure, setup and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
containerized form. Qt Application Manager provides a plugin interface to configure, set up and 
```

Reviewer: "set up" is the verb, "setup" is the noun.

and `ContainerManagerInterface`_

.. _Containers: https://doc.qt.io/QtApplicationManager/containers.html
.. _ContainerInterface: https://doc.qt.io/QtApplicationManager/containerinterface.html
.. _ContainerManagerInterface: https://doc.qt.io/QtApplicationManager/containermanagerinterface.html

Using the Qt Application Manager Plugin Interface, an example plugin is developed to communicate 
with Software Container Agent. This plugin is available as part of Qt Application Manager code 
and serves as an example of how to develop a container plugin for Qt Application Manager. The 
code for the plugin is available `here`_ under the **examples/softwarecontainer-plugin**.

.. _here: https://github.com/qt/qtapplicationmanager

Launcher Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Neptune3 UI is integrated as default UI for PELUX. As part of the integration, Neptune3 UI uses 
a default configuration located at **/opt/neptune3/am-config.yaml**. However, this configuration is 
not enough to enable softwarecontainer-plugin and run Neptune3 applications inside 
softwarecontainer. There is another configuration file integrated to append to the default 

> configuration, located at **/opt/am/sc-config.yaml**. This configuration enable the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration, located at **/opt/am/sc-config.yaml**. This configuration enables the 
```

> softwarecontainer-plugin as well as define what Neptune3 applications should be run inside the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
softwarecontainer-plugin as well as defines what Neptune3 applications should be run inside the 
```

> container.See the contents of **/opt/am/sc-config.yaml** below,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
container. See the contents of **/opt/am/sc-config.yaml** below,
```

.. code-block:: bash

    #
    # Copyright Pelagicore 2017
    #
    formatVersion: 1
    formatType: am-configuration
    ---
    containers:
      selection:
        - com.pelagicore.calendar: "softwarecontainer"
        - "*": "process"

      softwarecontainer:
        dbus: system

    plugins:
      container: [ "/usr/lib/libsoftwarecontainer-plugin.so" ]

The above configuration defines what software container plugin to use as well as Neptune3's 
calendar application to run inside software container, while running the rest of the applications 
on the host system as normal processes.

> All above mentioned configs and plugin libraries are installed as part of default PELUX software 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All above mentioned configurations and plugin libraries are installed as part of default PELUX software 
```

> container integration. The above config can be modified to either use a different plugin or run 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
container integration. The above configuration can be modified to either use a different plugin or run 
```

different applications inside a container.

Service Manifest
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Service manifest files are used to define capabilities that can be assigned to software containers. 

> Capabilities are a way to define container's access to the host system's environment, services and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Capabilities are a way to define the container's access to the host system's environment, services and 
```

resources. Each capability defines its access to the host system through definition of several 
gateways. Software container provides several gateways which are described in detail in the `Gateway`_ 
chapter of `Software Container documentation`_. The below service manifest configuration is 
defined/integrated with PELUX in **/etc/softwarecontainer/service-manifest.d/io.qt.ApplicationManager.Application.json** 

> file. It contains one capability that defines dbus, wayland and device gateways which are required 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. It contains one capability that defines dbus, wayland and device gateways which are required 
```

                    {
                      "direction": "*",
                      "interface": "*",
                      "object-path": "*",
                      "method": "*"
                    }
                  ],
                 "dbus-gateway-config-system": [
                    {
                      "direction": "*",
                      "interface": "*",
                      "object-path": "*",
                      "method": "*"
                    }
                  ]
                }
              ]
            },
            {
              "id": "wayland",
              "config": [
                {
                  "enabled": true
                }
              ]
            },
            {
              "id": "devicenode",
              "config": [
                {
                  "name": "/dev/dri/renderD128"
                },
                {
                  "name": "/dev/tty0"
                },
                {
                  "name": "/dev/tty1"
                }
              ]
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

Glossary 
--------

+--------+-------------------------------+

> | Term   |Definition                     |

Reviewer 2: Space before Definition.
